[Ken Wise (INTERVIEWER)]: Today is March 13, 2020, and we
are located in the John C. Hodges Library at the
University of Tennessee in Knoxville, Tennessee.
As part of the Rising from the Ashes Chimney Tops
II Wildfires Oral History Project, today we have
the honor of interviewing John Schwartz and Salley Reamer
regarding their experiences during and after the
Chimney Tops II Wildfires in 2016. My name is Ken
Wise, and I will be conducting today's interview
with John and Salley. Thank you so much for your
willingness to share your story with us. And let's
start out with each of you stating your name and
your relation here with the University of Tennessee.
[John Schwartz (NARRATOR 1)]: Okay, I guess I'll start. I'm a professor in the
Water in the Civil and Environmental
Engineering Department, but I'm also the Water
Director for the Tennessee Water Resources
Research Center that's also here on campus.
I've been at the University of Tennessee since
2003 in the department and worked my
way through tenure and to a full professor. And
that's why I'm here today. [Salley Reamer (NARRATOR 2]: My name's Salley Reamer,
and I started in 2018 on a master's degree in the
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
at UT, and Dr. Schwartz is my major advisor. [INTERVIEWER]: Okay,
well first question, can you kind of just give a reason why you
agreed to do this interview with us?
[NARRATOR 1]: Well I think it's an interesting project that
I think when we look back on it in years it
will reflect on the event and
people will have a lot of questions. So this will
help them understand what happened. [NARRATOR 2]: I agree
that it will be important. [INTERVIEWER]: All right, thank you. All
right could each of you explain just a little, John you sort of told us your history
of being here, but could you Salley tell us how long
you've been here in this area, and familiarized
yourself with East Tennessee and the Smokies area? [NARRATOR 2]: So
actually I'd never been to Knoxville until two years
ago, so I'm really new to the area. I just moved
here from South Carolina for graduate school.
So a more limited experience in the area. [INTERVIEWER]: So you've
been here for two years and that's your familiarity, and
you've been here for several years as a student.
So, I want to talk a little bit about the days leading
up to this fire. When did each of you first become
aware that there was a fire in the Smokies? [NARRATOR 1]: Well, I
guess since you were in South Carolina and I was
here, I heard it, well since I do research in the
Great Smoky Mountains National Park, so since
I really have been here, I do the water
quality analysis for the Smoky Mountains.
And so we have a high elevation research site up
by Clingman's Dome. And so our students, my students
over the years, it was a different student at the time
than Salley. We had a research group meeting that
day, and then he was supposed to go up to
Clingman's Dome to our research site, but then we
we have communications with the park, and
they said that, "no, there's a fire going on," and
I didn't really realize how serious it was at
that time. And they said, "well, the road's closed. You
can't get up there." And so then it wasn't
really until the evening, I heard it on NPR
that the fire really excavated and that
they were basically telling people that
they needed to leave. Actually for
us, actually we had some good friends that have a
second home up in the Ski Mountain area. And so we
called them on the phone and said, "did you hear on
NPR? You need to get, you need to get out of there."
So they they actually got in the car to leave, but
then the road was so clogged with people they
basically, they went back to their their home and
just hoped that it didn't
get them. [INTERVIEWER]: Apparently it didn't. [NARRATOR 1]: No, they were okay. Yeah.
[INTERVIEWER]: So tell me what your reactions are when you first heard
about this fire getting out of control.
[NARRATOR 1]: Well, you know, really since their not, wildfires
in this area aren't really that
prevalent, that I didn't really know what
to think. Actually, you know, it seemed pretty
serious or just unbelievable in a way. But that
was kind of, and until you see it, so like
after the aftermath, and then you see it, then you
realize, like wow, holy cow. That was a pretty
big event. But while is was happening it was
hard to imagine. We don't have a TV, so I
didn't see any visual images. [INTERVIEWER]: Oh okay so just NPR was your only. [NARRATOR 1]: Yeah, radio.
Right. [INTERVIEWER]: And your phone call. So when you make a phone call,
what did your friend tell you he was seeing out the window?
[NARRATOR 1]: He said it looked like there was fire all over the place. And
so, yeah, it was hard for them to describe.
And I think they realized it was
pretty serious, but then, too,
I don't know what they were thinking
exactly, but they would have, if they could
have left they would have came back to
Knoxville. But with the roads being so jammed with
people that they decided just to go back. [INTERVIEWER]: So
when did you first see the results of the fire?
[NARRATOR 1]: That was probably about a month afterwards or
something like that. So I had a meeting
with the park up there because I meet with them
regularly because of my research. And
then driving, it's that bypass road, that's
where you first see it coming in.
And so, it meant it looked pretty bad. And then there
was a there's another road, I forget the name of
it, but where the hotel... There was a hotel that
was up there that was burned down. Did you go up
and do samples up in that area? [NARRATOR 2]: A little bit.
[NARRATOR 1]: Yeah. [NARRATOR 2]: I can't remember the name. [INTERVIEWER]: And, what did you think? [NARRATOR 1]: Well, I thought it was
pretty catastrophic.
Yeah, I think probably afterwards just the
loss of life, I think is probably the thing that
was the worst thing about the whole thing and that...
[INTERVIEWER]: So the question here becomes once you've
seen this fire, and you've seen the results of it,
what did that prompt you to think about in terms of your research? Well, maybe
you should describe what your research that you've been doing
in the park is before you get to that question. [NARRATOR 1]: Yeah, I
think that's a good background for us because
I mean, it kind of, sets the stage.
I think everybody knows through news that
most of the wildfires in the country really occur
out west. And the majority of research that
has gone on about fire and the impacts of fire on
ecosystems and the environment really is from studies
that have occurred out west. And so really there
has been, well there's only been a few
studies that have occurred in eastern United
States, so this was for us a unique
opportunity to see what the potential impacts
of fire is on ecosystems, and particularly the
Great Smoky Mountains National Park because it's a
natural area, right, so it's not having any other
impacts from you know from humans and other
alterations. But to go back, for us it's
particularly our interest is because my research
with water quality sampling the Great Smoky
Mountains National Park comes from the fact that
the streams up there are affected by air pollution.
So the coal fired plants like Kingston Power
Plant, Bull Run and other power plants around the
east they, historically they put a lot of
sulfur up in the atmosphere. It comes down as, when
it's not even raining, the
particulates get trapped onto the leaves of the
forest. And when it rains it comes down into the
soils and then it ultimately comes into the
streams and the streams have very low pH in a
lot of areas. Also too, is that our research has
shown that the amount of sulfur in the stream
water has remained pretty much constant over these
years, so the soil acts like a big sponge for this
sulfur. And so what we were concerned about is if
with the fire, is that if all that sulfur is in that
soil layer is the fire would that release a large
amount of sulfur? And we see actually a
major response. But it's almost an
additional effect of this air pollution problem
that has occurred over the decades. So that was
for us really the interesting part of our
research, was to understand a) fire in
eastern United States which was not very well
known but also an area that's been impacted by air
pollution, acid rain basically, for decades.
[INTERVIEWER]: Salley let me ask you, you're doing this research with John. Can you describe
specifically what you did and what your interest is, and what
you were seeing when you first started on this project?
[NARRATOR 2]: Yeah. So like I said I started in 2018, and the
project was lined up when I got here.
They've decided soil sampling sites and
the scope of the project and what we were going to
look at. But it involved soil sampling in the park
at different sites and varying levels of burn. So
some sites for reference control sites that
weren't burned at all. And then up to areas that
were classified as a high burn status. So in those
areas there is very low vegetation. And the soil is
black and charred looking. So it was
pretty crazy to see those high burn areas
especially in the park. And then just analyzing
all the samples collected for a lot of different
parameters for the soils as well as the stream
samples that we've collected to look at them, to
compare them to the data before the fire, after the
fire, and then also by the burn level to
see what the impacts were in those areas that were a
low-moderate burn compared to the high burn
severity. [INTERVIEWER]: So what kind of impact were you looking
for? Impact... John mentioned something about the sulfur
content. What else were you looking for in terms of what
impact that the fire had? [NARRATOR 2]: So we were looking, a main goal
of the project was put together kind of a
characterization just of what happens after a
wildfire in the eastern environment, especially in
an acidic and humid environment where fires are
really rare. So just to put together a battery of
parameters and what what their levels were after a
fire in this environment, just in case something
were to happen in the future. Kind of what to
expect in that kind of thing. So we did test a lot
of parameters besides just the sulfur. But we also
wanted to look at the impacts as they compared to
what's been seen on the West Coast. Just to see if
the environment here responds differently to fire
than areas in California, Oregon, out west that have
been studied before. [INTERVIEWER]: Well let me come back to that
minute. Let's get back to this sponge effect of the
soil and the sulfur What did the two of you find when you look at the
streams? Did the fire release the sulfur or did it have no
effect? [NARRATOR 1]: Well, this is the interesting thing is that
there were some changes in sulfur, but we didn't
see, I think we actually, that there was a
decrease in sulfur in the stream, which was
kind of not expected. But that's, but then we
also, Salley also measured total sulfur. This is
maybe getting a little technical, but so sulfur
takes multiple forms. And then, so in the stream we
look at sulfate because it's the acidic element.
But we think that a lot of the sulfur
that was burned in the fire
stayed in a reduced state, so it didn't get
converted to sulfate. And so we do think there
was a lot of sulfate that left because your
data showed that the total sulfur was removed, but
it wasn't remove as sulfate to cause
acidification. But I think the interesting thing
that we found was that we did see also a release of
what we call base CAD ions, which are a sum
calcium and magnesium and potassium and sodium for
the most part. So these are all positively charged
ions. And they cling to soil
particles as well. We saw that that was
released and that actually had a change in the
stream chemistry is what we saw. [INTERVIEWER]: So it was
released stream [NARRATOR 1 and 2]: Mm hmm. [INTERVIEWER]: And what effect did
that release on the water? Good, bad, or indifferent?
[NARRATOR 1]: Well, the pH remained, it's kind of a balance.
It's some complex chemistry that we're
still looking at, but there were definitely
some acid ions that were released and the base
CAD ions. And so the pH basically stayed about
the same. So in that sense really
no effect. Or I would put it in
the point of there is no harmful effect that
would kill fish or anything like that. Or like
downstream the city Gatlinburg pulls some of their
drinking water supply from the Little Pigeon.
And so there'd be no effect basically to the water
supply. [INTERVIEWER]: Salley, you mentioned that y'all sampled in high
burned areas, moderate, and the no burn areas. Did you
see any distinctions between the three in the streams?
Can you tell what those were? [NARRATOR 2]: In the streams, we
didn't classify so much as the burn levels. That was
more for our soil sampling just due to the nature
of the streams. They're kind of being fed from a
lot of different areas in the burn. So we had
sites feeding the water sampling sites
from all levels of the burn, and the watersheds
feeding them are pretty big areas. So we didn't
classify the water so much as by burn
severity. But in the soils we have seen pretty big
differences between the hybrid areas and the
controls. So we've seen lower organic content
which we expected and a lot lower significantly
lower base CAD... [INTERVIEWER]: Okay, lower organic content. Can you explain
that to... [NARRATOR 2]: So, basically the soil horizons, the
top layer of soil, what vegetation grows
from and everything is the organic layer.
And so at those high sites it wasn't even there
because it had burned completely away. And so it
can have, I'd say it has big impacts on
vegetation returning. And that sort of thing, just
because there's nothing for the plants to grow out
of in those really high burned areas. So that's
expected. That would be seen in the West
Coast as well. [INTERVIEWER]: Well, what other differences other
than the, that the organic materials burned off?
[NARRATOR 2]: We've seen this similar, what we've been
talking, about lower base CAD ions. And then also
the sulfur was a lot lower in the high burned areas.
Everything was just decreased for the most part
besides exchangeable acidity which made sense
because the pH was dropping a little bit.
[INTERVIEWER]: You mentioned earlier something about, you were looking at
fires out west, which are fairly prevalent compared to the eastern parts.
Wildfire like this is pretty rare in the Smokies. What distinctions are you seeing
between the two? In terms of what causes them, what the results
were, how they operate. Can y'all, both of you... [NARRATOR 1]: Well, you've been doing
the literature review. [NARRATOR 2]: I'd say in terms of the
causes, what I've read mostly about West Coast
fires, what starts them, is the availability of
fine fuels on the ground. So things that can
ignite from anything anthropogenic, lightning
strike, it could be a lot of different things that
start those fires. But over here what really
caused this fire was just a perfect combination of
the drought conditions, windstorms, really low
moisture and then anthropogenic, obviously human
caused fire. So it's more of a situational
cause here. Whereas on the West Coast it's the
environment itself, not like the weather conditions
I guess. [NARRATOR 1]: And then from like the water quality side,
out west they find that after a fire the
streams will increase in nitrogen, and we
don't see that here in the east side. And
I think that's a function, it's just out west, it's so
much drier than here. And so after the fire,
and you had rains. Even though, so there was this
heterogeneity, hot burned, not so
hot burned, not burn at all. Just all kind of mixed
together in the watershed, is that the plants
basically came back pretty fast because
there's moisture. I mean, it rains here. Where out
west, the vegetation regrowth is not as quick. So
so there they are seeing more nitrogen
leaving the watersheds, and here, we think the
plants come. It doesn't matter what kind
of plan it is, so there's probably some ecosystem
influences on the type and diversity of plants.
But when it comes to chemistry, it doesn't
really matter. The plants need nitrogen and they
just pulling it all up. So we didn't see
that at all. Actually, well we saw actually a
little bit a decrease actually in nitrogen.
[INTERVIEWER]: Did that surprise you? [NARRATOR 1]: Well from, probably not.
But that was one thing that was a
hypothesis or a question in our research because
we only really had studies from out West to
compare it to. There were a few studies that were
done at Coweeta Research Lab, which is in North
Carolina, and there was a few studies there. But
other than that, there was really nothing else to
go on. So it was an interesting research
question because I mean we really don't know the
answers, but what we suspected, what we
found was true, and so now we have actually data
to show it. [INTERVIEWER]: What other hypotheses did the two of you have going
into this
post-fire research?
[NARRATOR 1]: Wanna stay for your thesis? [NARRATOR 2]: Yeah, I mean the pH stuff
was a little surprising. [INTERVIEWER]: What was the hypothesis from your research paper?
[NARRATOR 2]: The nitrate, or the nitrogen that we
mentioned was- we had a few hypotheses that kind of
turned out to be not as true as we, not right
at all. One of them was the ammonium pulse in the
streams right up to the fire. So we kind of
expected to see a different form of nitrogen
ammonium to increase right after the fire in
streams. And we didn't really see that in the
Smokies. And that's really common in a lot of the
studies we've seen out west. [INTERVIEWER]: Why did you expect it to increase? [NARRATOR 2]: I
think just looking at the other studies and
reading what they were seeing. [NARRATOR 1]: I think when
they burn the- because a lot of nitrogen in
the wood material, when it burns, it kind of
gets released from the burning of
the wood. [INTERVIEWER]: So you did not see what you thought you were going to see? [NARRATOR 1]: Yeah.
[INTERVIEWER]: Any other hypothesis you had going in? [NARRATOR 1]: Well, there was the one
with the sulfur because it's so much
sulfur built up in the... We expected actually to see
a release of sulfur as sulfate, but we didn't see
that. So that was kind of a new thing as
well, too. So I guess overall there wasn't
really as large of an environmental impact.
We just really didn't know. But I mean
I think we could say at least from our our data is
that you know the environmental impacts to soil
and chemistry were minimal. Now there's all sorts
of like plants. I think you interviewed you interviewed
Jen Schweitzer's and others, that they're in
with the plant and the ecosystem kind of level. There
can be some shifts there, but just some basic
chemistry, we didn't really see a major impact
or shifts, changes but nothing that would... [NARRATOR 2]: Yeah, nothing that
would change anything dramatically. [NARRATOR 1]: Yeah. Mm hmm. [INTERVIEWER]: So
it's been three years since the fire. Both of
you've been there several times, seeing it. Can you describe
what the recovery is like?
And perhaps even address whether this fire was
just a minor event in the history of Smokies?
[NARRATOR 1]: Well, was a pretty major event. And then we
were just there yesterday, and driving through, you
could still see the burn, the
impacts from it. So the visual impacts and
the impacts on vegetation will be decades. So
I think that that's pretty substantial
as far as the aesthetics. [NARRATOR 2]: And a few of the trails. A few of
the trails are still closed because the fire
damaged them to such a level that it's gonna take
a while for them to come back and be safe for
people to use, including the Chimney Tops trail
where it started. [INTERVIEWER]: Well, isn't a fire like this, in a wilderness area
a natural occurrence? So part of
the cycle? [NARRATOR 1]: Yeah, there's other
researchers here, this is not in our
area of research, but there's other researchers,
Sally Horn in Geography. And you may plan or have
interviewed her, but she was doing work on the
the history of fire in the eastern United
States. And there definitely was a much greater
history of fire here. And then, and this is
part of what Salley was kind of was leading to, is the
difference of what caused the fire.
There was perfect conditions, dry and the wind, and
the drought but also, too, the fire suppression. For
years, there was so much fuels that were
available that it just, once it got going, it was so
hot, it just it was hard stopping
it. And the Park Service has a policy of not
having an intervention, whether that was the
greatest policy or not in a park that's next to
an urban center... That's that's not my, you know, I'm
not a policymaker. But anyway, it seems like that
may be something they want to rethink actually. [INTERVIEWER]: Okay,
what is the trajectory of your research? You've got this, and you've been at it
for a while. Where do you see it going now?
[NARRATOR 1]: Well, I think, since I'll be here and you'll be graduated.
Well, I think there's been some
shifts- even though I was indicating there's
no- we didn't find any really harmful
environmental impacts, there were shifts in the
chemistry. So it would be interesting to see
over the long term if we come back to the
original kind of balance between acids
and bases in the soils, and as the trees
grow back and the organic matter build
back into the soil. How long will
that take? That's kind of an
interesting question. And then just long term
chemistry in the stream. Sometimes there's
really is really quite a lag effect, where
you may not see, at least in watersheds and
stream taking a stream sample is that there may
have been some kind of impact 10 years ago. And
then you may not pick it up for
ten years or something. There can be some lag
effects. So this is why the park has embarked on a
long term water quality monitoring program. And
that's basically what I've managed since
I've been here. I inherited the project from from
another professor that retired. And so the
water quality work in the park has been ongoing
since 1991. So long term. [INTERVIEWER]: So this is the University of Tennessee doing this
project? [NARRATOR 1]: With the National Park Service.
So it's just been this long term monitoring.
So really actually, the thing that's really unique
about the Great Smoky Mountain National Park
there's very few places in the country that have
such a long term data set as what we have here in
the Great Smoky Mountain National Park. The only
other place I can think of is there's a research
experimental forest up in New Hampshire called
Hubbert Brook. And other than that, so
that's really the Great Smoky Mountains National
Park is very unique.
[INTERVIEWER]: Well kind of in layman's terms, can the two of you sort of spell out
what the value of this research is to the average
person out here? How does it, not benefit them
directly, but important for them to know what
you're finding and know what you're keeping track
of and why it's important to monitor the quality
of the water in a wilderness area.
[NARRATOR 1]: Well, the park
has a responsibility to manage the natural
resources because it is a national park. And so
they want to understand if there is any
impacts from our research that needed them to
think about restoration or mitigation efforts in
the future, then our research would have
helped support the resource managers up in the
park. But there is also, too, that water supply.
Gatlinburg pulls the water from the stream,
so in particular there, I think that
was probably, early on was actually, the real- There
was a lot of concern by the citizens in Gatlinburg
whether there was heavy metals because we also
measure heavy metals as well too, dissolved
heavy metals in the water. They were afraid that
the water was going to be
contaminated. So early on we were
actually pretty easily satisfied the
citizens of Gatlinburg that there wasn't a problem.
Their water treatment plant was going to work fine.
And so there was nothing to worry about. So
there was concern from that from the citizens of
Gatlinburg. So that was from a community
effect, we're able to make people feel
more comfortable about the water they're drinking.
[INTERVIEWER]: Well, your colleagues in the scientific community,
did they- have you run across any research where they're
saying, for example, that the water quality after the
fire has affected, say salamanders or fish or snakes
or any other animals that would use the water? There were
a couple... Oh did you stick around, you were
there in the morning. There was a couple talks on
salamanders. [NARRATOR 2]: Yeah, that was interesting. [NARRATOR 1]: So, it seems like
there is some effect. I mean that's outside our
area of research. But we did see some talks
yesterday at the Great Smoky Mountains National
Park Science Colloquium. So it was salamanders,
and there were some plants. So there are
definitely some impacts to the
wildlife and how quick they recover.
I'm not sure.
A biologist needs to answer those questions.
[INTERVIEWER]: Was there anything that surprised you about any of
the fire itself, your research findings or what you
stumbled across while you were there? Any real
surprises?
[NARRATOR 1]: Well, I think from Salley's work...
No one really has talked about
base CAD ions as being changed in the
soil chemistry.
And so again, that's just so for laymen that's
calcium and magnesium and sodium and potassium.
Potassium in particular is a plant nutrient.
All plants need potassium. And so I guess
there could really be long term effects to the
ecosystem is that calcium doesn't
replenish quickly in the environment. It takes
decades and decades for it to build up in the
soil. And then all of a sudden with this fire is
if now we see this release of calcium and
magnesium and potassium in particular leave the
environment. [INTERVIEWER]: [inaudible]: [NARRATOR 1]: Well, it mobilizes.
So basically it was in the organic, it was in the plant
material. And then the plant material burns, and
then it just becomes in its elemental form. And
then when it rains it just washes down.
And then so just that export of those ions and
the lack of that now in the soil
could really have some long term ecosystem effects.
This is why I mean kind of like lag effects that
we are not seeing any immediate
changes, except the base CAD ions. We
did see that that change. That can have some
long term effects. And I think that that
was the interesting and surprising question that
we didn't think- we were really looking
because most studies nitrogen and sulfur.
So sulfur and nitrogen were the big
ones everybody was looking at. No one really is
looking at the base CAD ions. So that would be our
real new story for our research out of this. And
then continuous long term study, answering
your other questions. I think we could see changes
in water chemistry change. Or at least
comparatively to other unburned areas in the
park, as the vegetation grows back or doesn't grow
back. And we may see some long term
effects. Again is there any really major
harm? Fish aren't going to be dying or whatever,
but we do see a shift in the environmental
conditions. Yeah. [INTERVIEWER]: Well, we've had a fire in 2016
unlike anything anybody had seen before. You think
we'll have another one like it?
[NARRATOR 2]: From what I've been reading about it, wildfires
are supposed to becoming more and more prevalent
going forward just due to climate change and
the environmental conditions we've been seeing.
Where it's really rainy for amount of time and
then really dry. And that kind of makes more
opportunity for an event like this to happen again.
So I mean hopefully not in the Smokies, or anywhere
but... [INTERVIEWER]: So we're going to have another one. [NARRATOR 2]: From what I've been reading.
People are predicting that it'll become more and
more common in the West Coast and East Coast. [NARRATOR 1]: Yeah,
I think that's a fair assumption, I think.
[INTERVIEWER]: Well, we've covered a lot of material here.
Your research and the findings and
projects. Is there anything that we haven't
discussed that you'd like to bring up?
Whether it's what you saw about the fire or the
emotional reaction to it?
Anything you would like to add to the story line here.
[NARRATOR 2]: Hmmm.
[NARRATOR 1]: Well, I think for me, when I finally
went there afterwards, like that month
right after the fire, just seeing how widespread
and destructive it was. It was just pretty
astonishing really. I mean, it's just hard to
imagine actually. Really. And it's going to be
a while before it recovers. And because
even now so many years out, three plus years out,
that we're still seeing the
impacts. So yeah. [NARRATOR 2]: Yeah. I'd say, we had a site at
the Chimney Tops, the top of the trailhead, and the
origin of the fire. And that was the most shocking
spot in the park that I saw because obviously
it's barred to visitors. And so it's just you and
whoever is helping you sample the soils. It's just so, it's
dramatic. The landscape looks so much different after
the fire.
[INTERVIEWER]: Well I really appreciate both of you sharing your
story with us. It was fascinating. And thanks
again. And if you have any other final comments.
[NARRATOR 1]: I think
we kind of covered it pretty
much. We appreciate the offer to have us
give a talk, and I hope your project goes well.
[INTERVIEWER]: Thank you very much. I appreciate that.